   systems fall into three broad categories: first-order,
   logic-programming, and action rules. These paradigms share little in
   the way of syntax and semantics. Moreover, there are large differences
--

   The RIF Working Group has focused on two kinds of dialects: logic-based
   dialects and dialects for rules with actions. Generally, logic-based
   dialects include languages that employ some kind of logic, such as
   first-order logic (often restricted to Horn logic) or non-first-order
   logics underlying the various logic programming languages (e.g., logic
   programming under the well-founded or stable semantics). The
--
   to the limited resources of the RIF Working Group, it defined only two
   logic dialects, the Basic Logic Dialect (RIF-BLD) and a subset, the RIF
   Core Dialect, shared with RIF-PRD; the Production Rule Dialect
--
   Developing RIF-FLD as a framework turned out to be feasible because
   despite the diversity of logical theories underlying the different
   logic rule systems, they share much of the same syntactic and semantic
   machinery. Moreover, the ways to combine the different pieces of that
   machinery in order to create those logic systems are well studied.
   However, the RIF-FLD specification is unique in that it digests much of
--

   RIF-FLD is a very general logic language that includes a great deal of
   commonly used syntactic and semantic apparatus; however, it purposely
--
   signatures. It also specifies certain semantic notions, such as models
   and logical entailment, but it leaves certain other options open (for
   instance, which exact models are to be used for entailment). A dialect
--
   specialization from the RIF framework -- the preferred mode of
   specification for various future logic dialects.

--
   then, should RIF rules refer to RDF and OWL facts, and what is the
   logical meaning of the overall language? RIF-RDF and OWL Compatibility
   defines just that. The basic idea is that RIF uses its frame syntax to
--
     * RIF-BLD: The Basic Logic Dialect. This is one of the two major
       dialects, and the main logic-based dialect, developed by the group.
       Technically, this dialect corresponds to Horn logic with various
       syntactic and semantic extensions. The main syntactic extensions
--
       systems like Jess or JRules, are defined using ad hoc computational
       mechanisms, which are not based on a logic. For this reason,
       RIF-PRD is not part of the suite of logical RIF dialects and stands
       apart from them. However, significant effort has been extended to
--
       RIF-BLD and RIF-PRD based on RIF-DTB 1.0, thus enabling limited
       rule exchange between logic rule dialects and production rules.
       RIF-Core corresponds to Horn logic without function symbols (often
       called 'Datalog') with a number of extensions to support features
       such as objects and frames as in F-logic, internationalized
       resource identifiers for concepts, and XML Schema datatypes.
--
     * RIF-FLD: The Framework for Logic Dialects. RIF-FLD is not a dialect
       in its own right, but rather a general logical extensibility
       framework. It was introduced in order to drastically lower the
       amount of effort needed to define and verify new logic dialects
       that extend the capabilities of RIF-BLD.
