   Development

Logic Programming loves Data

   How to leverage logic programming to enhance data-driven development

     * Fabien Alberi
--
   Dec 20, 2023 • 10 min read

   Logic Programming loves Data Photo by Alexander Sinn / Unsplash

   In a previous post we have seen how datalog language - and consequently
   logic programming - can be convenient in the context of data querying
   and exploration.

   We will now see how logic programming can be helpful in the context of
   data transformation. Let's first have a deeper look at logic
   programming concepts.

What-is Logic Programming ?

   Logic programming is a programming paradigm that is based on formal
   logic. In logic programming, programs are written in the form of
   logical statements or rules, which define relationships and constraints
   between different entities.
--
   Unlike other programming paradigms, such as functional programming and
   object-oriented programming, which focus on how to achieve a specific
   task, logic programming is concerned with representing and reasoning
   about knowledge.

   Programs written in a logic programming language mainly consist of a
   set of facts, rules and queries.

--
- Is Mary the mother of Jim? => yes

   Logic programming is particularly suited to problems that can be
   represented as logical relationships. For example, logic programming
   can be used to solve inference, reasoning, and planning problems.

--
Building Blocks

   Here are the key features of the logic programming paradigm.
     * Declarative Style: Logic programming is declarative, meaning that
       you specify what you want to achieve rather than how to achieve it.
     * Logic Rules: Programs consist of a set of logical rules or clauses.
       These rules are expressed in the form of predicates and facts,
       which represent relationships between objects or conditions.
--
       it valuable for applications that require a deep understanding of
       data and the ability to make logical deductions.
     * Backtracking: Logic programming often involves a mechanism called
       backtracking. If a particular path of inference does not lead to a
       solution, the system can backtrack and explore alternative paths.
--
Application Domains

   Here are some generic examples of how logic programming can be used:
     * To represent knowledge about the real world, such as relationships
       between objects or properties of objects.
--

   Here are some specific domains of application:
     * Artificial Intelligence: Logic programming is a fundamental
       building block of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. It's
       used in various AI applications, including symbolic reasoning,
       machine learning, and knowledge engineering.
     * Natural Language Processing: Logic programming is used in natural
       language processing (NLP) applications to analyze and understand
       human language. It helps in tasks like machine translation, text
       summarization, and question answering.
     * Expert Systems: Logic programming plays a crucial role in building
       expert systems, which are computer programs that emulate human
       expertise in a specific domain. It helps in representing domain
       knowledge, reasoning about complex problems, and providing expert
       advice.
     * Database Management Systems: Logic programming is integrated into
       some database management systems (DBMS) to provide advanced query
       capabilities and knowledge-based features. It helps in handling
       complex queries, managing meta-data, and performing data mining
       tasks.
     * Verification and Validation: Logic programming is used in
       verification and validation of data consistency to ensure its
       correctness and adherence to specifications. It helps in
       formalizing requirements, and identifying potential errors.

When to use logic programming ?

   Logic programming has several advantages that it may be advisable to
   exploit in certain situations.

   Being declarative means that logic programs focus on what the program
   should do, rather than how it should do it, making them easier to
   understand, maintain, and modify.

   Furthermore, logic programs are expressive, allowing them to represent
   complex and abstract concepts in a concise and natural way.

   Additionally, logic programs are flexible and can accommodate different
   modes of execution, such as forward chaining or backward chaining which
   are especially useful in rules-engines.
--
     bit of hacking and slashing to find your way through.

   Logic programming can significantly enhance data-driven architectures
   by providing a declarative and knowledge-driven approach to data
   processing and analysis. Its ability to represent complex relationships
--
   rsz_logic_model_resized.jpg

   Logic programming offers a powerful and versatile approach that makes
   it a valuable tool for extracting information from data and enabling
   knowledge-driven decision-making.
--
Synergy with functional programming

   We have seen logic programming offers a powerful approach for tasks
   that require extensive knowledge representation, reasoning, and
   inference.
--
       abstractions and concise code.

   Functional programming and logic programming are both declarative
   programming paradigms that offer unique strengths and applications.
   Feature Functional Programming Logic Programming
   Program Structure Functions as the primary building blocks Facts and
   rules as the foundation
--
Taking the best of both worlds

   While functional programming and logic programming are two distinct
   programming paradigms, there are areas of overlap and potential
   synergies between them.
     * Declarative Style: Functional Programming emphasizes a declarative
       style, where programs are written as a series of mathematical-like
       expressions. Logic Programming also follows a declarative style,
       where programs describe relationships and constraints rather than a
       sequence of steps.
--
       involving complex relationships and constraints.

   Despite the fact functional and logic programming have distinct design
   principles, their combination or integration can lead to powerful and
   expressive programming models.

   Therefore, librairies and frameworks of functional languages that
   incorporate features from logic paradigm (pattern-matching,
   logic-rules) such as datascript which is based on datalog and prolog
   principles, continue to be developed and may be very good options to
   consider.
--
   Let's now dive into implementations in the clojure ecosystem

   See below 3 libraries which incorporates features of logic programming.
   Each of them offers a different level of abstraction.

1. Core.logic

   A low-level logic programming library for Clojure & ClojureScript.
   core.logic offers Prolog-like relational programming, constraint logic
   programming, and nominal logic programming for Clojure.
 (run* [q]
   (membero q [1 2 3])
--

   Meander is a declarative data manipulation toolset created as a library
   in Clojure. Borrowing ideas from logic programming and term rewriting,
   Meander allows declarative descriptions of arbitrarily complex data;
   enabling you to search, match, remember, join, and transform any part
--

   These different implementations make it possible to incorporate
   principles of logic programming into more global projects based on
   versatile and commonly used programming languages.

A Real-Life scenario

   Let's now address the question of using logic programming concepts in a
   concrete use-case.

--

   The approach based on the Meander library allows to pass all the
   business logic in more a declarative form, for all the rules for
   pattern-matching and transformation.
(require '[meander.epsilon :as m])
--
   extract the definiton of the rule in the form of a data structure;
   which, once isolated from the rest of the code, represents a kind of
   predicate-as-data for declaring all the business logic of the solution.

   Let's go a step further and try see how to use a domain-specific
--
Caveats & Conclusion

   While logic programming offers a unique and powerful approach to
   problem-solving, it is not without its limitations and challenges. Here
   are some of the caveats of logic programming that should be considered
   when evaluating its suitability for a specific project:
     * Computational Efficiency: Logic programming can be computationally
       expensive, especially for complex problems with large knowledge
       bases. The search for solutions through logical inference can
       become time-consuming, particularly in cases where multiple
       solutions exist or when dealing with extensive data sets.
     * Non-determinism: Logic programming is an inherently
       non-deterministic programming paradigm, meaning that the system is
       designed to find all possible solutions rather than a single
--
       control and may lead to unpredictable behavior, especially in
       large-scale applications.
     * Debugging Complexity: Debugging logic programs can be challenging
       due to their declarative nature and the non-deterministic execution
       flow. Identifying the source of errors or unexpected results can be
       time-consuming and may require a deep understanding of the
       underlying logic and search strategies.

   alt text

   Despite these caveats, logic programming remains a valuable tool for a
   variety of applications, particularly those that require knowledge
   representation.

   Careful consideration of these limitations and understanding the
   strengths of logic programming are crucial for making informed
   decisions about its suitability for specific projects.

   Logic programming is not a silver bullet. But it offers a range of very
   interesting possibilities if used sparingly.

   To date, the timely use of functionalities taken from logic programming
   has made it possible to considerably improve the maintainability of my
   code in production.
--
Articles

     * What are the main characteristics and examples of logic programming
       paradigms?
     * Transforming data with malli and meander
--
Videos

     * Logic programming with clara-rules - William Parker
     * William Byrd on "The Most Beautiful Program Ever Written" [PWL NYC]
     * Meander: declarative explorations at the limits of fp
     * Introduction to Logic Programming and Open World Reasoning

Books

     * Algorithm = Logic + Control
     * The Joy of Clojure, 2nd Edition
     * The Little Schemer, 4th Edition
