
   A logic analyzer is an electronic instrument that captures and displays
   multiple logic signals from a digital system or digital circuit. A
   logic analyzer may convert the captured data into timing diagrams,
   protocol decodes, state machine traces, opcodes, or may correlate
--

   Presently, there are three distinct categories of logic analyzers
   available on the market:
     * Modular LAs, which consist of both a chassis or mainframe and logic
       analyzer modules.^[2] The mainframe/chassis contains the display,
--
       a specific number of channels, and multiple modules may be combined
       to obtain a very high channel count. While modular logic analyzers
       are typically more expensive, the ability to combine multiple
       modules to obtain a high channel count and the generally higher
       performance of modular logic analyzers often justifies the price.
       For the very high end modular logic analyzers, the user often must
       provide their own host PC or purchase an embedded controller
--

   [220px-8-Channel_%28cropped%29.jpg] 8-channel USB logic analyzer
     * Portable LAs,^[4] sometimes referred to as standalone LAs. Portable
       logic analyzers integrate everything into a single package, with
       options installed at the factory. While portable logic analyzers
       generally have lower performance than their modular counterparts,
--

   A logic analyzer can be triggered on a complicated sequence of digital
   events, then capture a large amount of digital data from the system
--

   When logic analyzers first came into use, it was common to attach
   several hundred "clips" to a digital system. Later, specialized
   connectors came into use. The evolution of logic analyzer probes has
   led to a common footprint that multiple vendors support, which provides
--
   defects before the unit is constructed. The simulation usually provides
   logic analysis displays. Often, complex discrete logic is verified by
   simulating inputs and testing outputs using boundary scan. Logic
--
   Field-programmable gate arrays have become a common measurement point
   for logic analyzers and are also used to debug the logic circuit.

   Logic Analyzers are also very useful when it comes to analyze serial
   protocols, like I2C, SPI or UART, as they allow to capture long logic
   sequences showing one or several communication frames. Usually, the
--
   Mixed-signal oscilloscopes combine the functionality of a digital
   storage oscilloscope with a logic analyzer. The several benefits of
   these include the ability to view analog and digital signals together
--
   they do not capture state-mode data, they have a limited channel count,
   and do not provide the analytical depth and insight of a logic
   analyzer.
