   #LARS P. SYLL » Feed LARS P. SYLL » Comments Feed LARS P. SYLL » On the
   use of logic and mathematics in economics Comments Feed alternate
   alternate LARS P. SYLL WordPress.com
--

On the use of logic and mathematics in economics

--
     thinking and reasoning in strict accordance with the limitations and
     incapacities of the human misunderstanding. The basic of logic is
     the syllogism, consisting of a major and a minor premise and a
--
     This may be called syllogism arithmetical, in which, by combining
     logic and mathematics, we obtain a double certainty and are twice
     blessed.
--

   In mainstream economics, both logic and mathematics are used
   extensively. And most mainstream economists sure look upon themselves
--
   fails since there is no way you can relevantly analyse confirmation or
   explanation as a purely logical relation between hypothesis and
   evidence or between law-like rules and explananda. In science, we argue
   and try to substantiate our beliefs and hypotheses with reliable
   evidence. Propositional and predicate deductive logic, on the other
   hand, is not about reliability, but the validity of the conclusions
--
   real-world ontology (only relating propositions as true or false within
   a formal-logic system) and as an argument scheme is totally
   non-ampliative — the output of the analysis is nothing else than the
--

   In science we standardly use a logically non-valid inference — the
   fallacy of affirming the consequent — of the following form:
--

   Although logically invalid, it is nonetheless (as already Charles S.
   Peirce argued more than a century ago) a kind of inference — abduction
--
   (premise 2). The truth of the conclusion (explanation) is nothing that
   is logically given, but something we have to justify, argue for, and
   test in different ways to possibly establish with any certainty or
--
   course we can. Inferences to the best explanation are fallible
   inferences — since the premises do not logically entail the conclusion
   — so from a logical point of view, inference to the best explanation is
   a weak mode of inference. But if the arguments put forward are strong
--
   defeasible reasoning in inference to the best explanation — well, then
   get in to math or logic, not science.
     *
--
    3. Dave, I think you misread me here. I certainly have no problem at
       all with mathematics or logic per se. That’s not what I am
       criticising. Far from it. But to insist on always applying
--
    4. As a mathematician, I just don’t see how this helps. Taking Lars’
       last paragraph, isn’t logic relevant to science? And in so far as
       science is interested in mathematical structures (such as numbers)
--
       This is very like Lars’ notion of abduction, but is strictly
       logical for any strictly logical interpretation of ‘implies’ and
       ‘evidence’. Lars wishes to go beyond abduction to ‘inference to the
       best explanation’. This could also be made logical, by having a
       logical definition of ‘best’. It seems to me that neoclassical
       economics could be reformulated in a way that meets Lars’
       requirements and is also logical (and mathematical): it is just
       that Lars (and I) might not accept their notion of ‘best’
--
       their lead from some inadequate understanding of science and hence
       a misuse of logic and a misinterpretation of mathematical results.
       This seems a better explanation (to me) than Lars’ view is that
       logic and maths per se are to blame. (But maybe the teaching of
       maths and logic are at fault?)
       Comment by Dave Marsay— 13 Mar, 2021 #
